I am Anna Yaroslavna, born in 1025 in Kyiv,
Ukraine. I am the third wife of King Henry I
of France, sister-in-law of kings Andrew the
first of Hungary and Harald III of Norway,
and mother of Philip, King of the Franks.
I am the daughter of Grand Prince Yaroslav
the Wise of Kyiv and Ingegerd, daughter of King
Olof Skotkunung of Sweden. My marriage to King
Henry was to secure my family’s support against
the Holy Roman Empire, to obtain a male heir,
and to comply with the church's regulations
forbidding marriage with close cousins.
Our marriage took place at the Reims Cathedral
on 1051, and the first of our three sons, later
King Philip I, was born in 1052. The name ‘Philip’
was very rare in France prior to that time and was
likely inspired by Saint Philip who converted an
area identified with Kyivan Rus in the Middle Ages
to Christianity. After my husband’s death in 1060,
I ruled France as co-regent while my son, Philip
was a child. In 1061, I married Count Raoul the
third of Valois, resulting in our ex-communication
by Pope Alexander II because Raoul already had
a wife. After my second husband’s death in 1074,
I returned to Philip’s court.
My signature in Cyrillic on a French royal charter
from the 1060s is the only known example of a
Capetian queen's signature on parchment and the
only known signature of a member of the Riurykide
dynasty. It is the oldest extant example of Old
Ukrainian handwriting. I was cited as a symbol of
Franco-Russian friendship and when Tsar Nicholas
II visited Paris in 1896, he received a facsimile
copy of the charter of Soissons containing my
signature. I was also been claimed as part of
Ukraine’s heritage, in particular, to stress
Ukraine’s ties with and aspirations to become
part of the Western European community. I am
featured on Ukrainian stamps. My life led to the
establishment of many connections across Europe.
I hope my global heritage remains to this day
across all nations to live in peace and harmony.